COUGAR TRAIL - HUMAN EDITING GUIDE

Open Cougar_Trail_Editable.FCStd, not the static Cougar_Trail.FCStd.
Save As a new working copy before making design changes.
No generator script or third-party workbench is needed for ordinary edits.
FreeCAD's bundled Draft workbench supplies the editable 3D lace paths.

START HERE
The numbered tree groups follow the shoe's construction, not just its colors.
Expand a finished component to find its sketches, projections, offsets and cuts.
Hidden construction features are intentionally retained as live dependencies.
Do not delete or replace a sketch to make a small adjustment: edit it in place.

Parameters is a real driving spreadsheet. Edit column B, then recompute.
It controls upper wall, panel bonding margin, seam width, eyelet dimensions,
lace section and lug depth. It does NOT globally resize the shoe.
The nominal 300 mm sole length and the reconstructed last are inferred.

PANEL LINES AND MATERIAL JOINS
Under Lateral or Medial, expand a panel and its Projection, then double-click
the Outline sketch. These are side-view sketches projected onto a fixed
curved layer stock. Windows are inner loops in the same sketch.
Coincident constraints keep adjoining spline endpoints joined.
Use Sketcher "Show internal geometry" to expose spline control poles.
Close the sketch and recompute to update the panel and its bonding flange.
Keep loops closed and non-self-intersecting; avoid crossing inner/outer loops.
Large moves outside the support stock can create empty intersections.

Shared Quarter Material Boundary controls BOTH textile panels and seam strips.
Changing it preserves their shared material transition.
Collar Opening Outline cuts the aperture. The collar padding is not attached
to this 2D outline: adjust/rebuild the padding if the opening changes.

SOLE
Expand the midsole Section Loft below the finished EVA pocket cut.
Each transverse sketch lies in a YZ plane at its labeled X station.
Edit the cross-section's control poles for heel flare, waist or rolled lip.
Use the sketch's Placement.X for longitudinal station position.
Maintain the order of stations and the order of edges around each section.
The rubber carrier has its own section loft; coordinate adjoining edits.
Rubber shoulder inserts cut their own matching pockets out of the foam.
Lugs have separate footprint and seat sketches and native lofts.
Parameters.LugHeight changes the footprint height while retaining the seat.

FRONT PROTECTION
The orange bumper is now a native loft through eleven horizontal section
sketches. Edit their outlines and Z placements for the toe wrap and wider wings.
Keep the paired inner/outer curves coherent and edit neighboring sections
together, rather than introducing a sudden change at one station.
The four diagonal grips are trimmed from relief extruded from the bumper's
outer face. They follow bumper section edits and remain embedded in the wrap.
Move each grip's projection block to reposition it on the curved surface.

LACING
Eyestays use editable outline sketches, inset offsets and cylinder bores.
Eyelet rings are native tori; their dimensions are spreadsheet-driven.
Bores, rings and lace endpoints are not a single constrained assembly:
move corresponding features together when repositioning an eyelet.

For a lace, expand its Sweep and select the named 3D path.
Switch to Draft and use Edit to move its interpolation points, or edit
the Points property in Data. Its section is attached to the path's start.
The Sweep updates when the path or elliptical section changes.
The refined crossing paths clear the padded tongue and rise around its edges.
Their over/under spacing is fitted to the actual solid sections.
This fitting is the initial layout, not a constraint solver that reruns after
manual changes. Adjust the paths if you change lace width or tongue geometry.
Tongue Lace Keeper has its own outline sketch and follows the tongue surface.

WALLS AND FIXED REFERENCES
Offset features have a real signed Value controlling wall thickness.
Their supporting NURBS surfaces are fixed reference geometry.
The hidden "FIXED reference surfaces and layer stocks" group contains those
supports. Layer-stock thicknesses are NOT driven by Parameters.UpperWall.
An upper-wall change may therefore require adjustment of overlapping panels.

Some complex finished details remain fixed BREP geometry. They are identified
by their EditInstructions and listed in editable_manifest.json.
These include the lining, variable collar binding, graphic,
rear fabric patch, rubber shoulders and fine heel stitching.
Their Placement can be changed, but they have no sketch-driven shape history.
They can be replaced by new native features using the existing shape as a guide.
Do not assume a sole edit automatically refits the upper or these details.

DISPLAY AND EXPORT
Only finished components should be visible for rendering. Sketches, support
stocks, projection prisms and cutters are hidden but remain in the tree.
RenderMaterial, BaseColor and Roughness are placeholder appearance metadata.
Colors, gradients, knit structure and lace yarns belong to visualization.
Do not split the foam into gradient bands or perforate textile geometry.

present_editable.FCMacro restores the intended visibility and writes twelve
editable_*.png views directly from this document's FreeCAD view.
It saves the native file. STEP export is separate, so an exporter failure cannot
interrupt the image loop. Do not export the entire tree, which also contains
support stocks and cutters.
Cougar_Trail_Editable.step is the complete exchange export of this refinement.
It contains named geometry, not the native editing history. Material identities
and original display labels are recorded in Cougar_Trail_Editable.validation.json;
the headless exchange does not preserve the GUI's placeholder colors.

For a new STEP after editing, use the separate headless exporter with an UNUSED
output filename. It refuses to replace an existing STEP or its report/log files.
From the project root on this Mac:

PYTHONPATH=/Applications/FreeCAD.app/Contents/Resources/lib \
  /Applications/FreeCAD.app/Contents/Resources/bin/python \
  examples/cougar-shoes/export_cougar_step.py \
  examples/cougar-shoes/cad/Cougar_Trail_Editable.FCStd \
  examples/cougar-shoes/cad/Cougar_Trail_Revision_02.step

This uses temporary exchange copies, not changes to the editable source.
Direct GUI STEP export remains unreliable for this model.
The build script recreates the handoff from the reference reconstruction;
DO NOT run it over your working copy expecting it to preserve manual edits.

LIMITS
This is an image-based rendering concept, not a fit-validated production last
or released tooling. Cross-sections and hidden construction remain inferred.
The editable file provides live features for local refinement, not a fully
constrained footwear sizing system or an exact surface-control-net editor.
